As one who pausing on the tedious slope Of some high mountain, thoughtfully looks back On the long, painful, and uncertain track His feet have trodden:--then, with awe and hope Commingled, gazes where, beyond the scope Of utmost vision, majestically dread, Its "cloud-capt" summit rises over-head-- So stand I now!--Henceforward I must cope With greater perils, with less outward aid. Father! who hast in mercy hitherto, And love and pity guided, bear me through! Well may I, when I ponder, be dismayed; My purity is sin--my strength is dust-- Nor dare I but in Thine own promise trust! When from the vaulted wonder of the sky The curtain of the light is drawn aside, And I behold the stars in all their wide Significance and glorious mystery, Assured that those more distant orbs are suns Round which innumerable worlds revolve, My faith grows strong, my day-born doubts dissolve, And death, that dread annulment which life shuns, Or fain would shun, becomes to life the way, The thoroughfare to greater worlds on high, The bridge from star to star.  Seek how we may, There is no other road across the sky; And, looking up, I hear star-voices say: "You could not reach us if you did not die." It fell as softly as the winter's snow: There was no sound of storm nor any stress, No fevered daring of Death's mightiness, No struggle for a strong man's overthrow: Just some few hours of moaning, soft and low, Some hard-drawn breathing, quickly hushed, ah yes! And then,--and then,--small white limbs motionless, While we who wait must whisper as we go. A face and voice we looked for lovingly Lost from the fellowship of our small band: One little ripple of Life's restless sea Soothed into stillness by the Master's hand, And missing here:--but a white soul to stand In the vast Temple of Eternity. I thought, because we had been friends so long, That I knew all your dear lips dared intend Before they dawned to speech. Our thoughts would blend, I dreamed, like memories that faintly throng. Your voice dwelt in me like an olden song. Petal, I thought, from petal I could rend The blossom of your soul, and at the end Find still the same sweet fragrance. I was wrong. Last evening in our eyes love brimmed to birth; Our friendship faded, lost in passion's mist. We had been strangers only! Here, close-caught Against my heart the dim face I had sought So long! And now the only thing on earth-- Your piteous mouth, a-tremble to be kissed!